# AutoAuth

AutoAuth (working title) is an extension to IndieAuth to allow clients to obtain tokens for other sites without the user being present to complete an interactive flow. Obtaining those tokens is controlled by the user's authorization endpoint, which allows the user to still be in control of tokens generated for the client.

[TOC]



### Participants

* User: the end user.
* Authorization Endpoint: Authorization Endpoint on the user's URL. 
* Resource: protected resource requiring a token connected to the user to access
* Token Endpoint: Unless otherwise specified, the Token Endpoint of the Resource. Verifies and grants requests for tokens.
* Client: Application the user is authorizing to request tokens in their name.

## Detecting Authorization Requirements of a Resource

The possibility to access a resource through AutoAuth is discovered through the `WWW-Authenticate` header field, as described in [RFC6750](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6750#section-3). In addition to this, a Link header with a rel value of `token_endpoint` has to be present. 

If the resource contains information for non-authorized requests, it MUST return a non-error HTTP code (commonly `200`) to requests not containing a token. An example of this would be a feed of posts that also contains public posts accessible to anyone. The presence of the `WWW-Authenticate` header indicates to the client that private posts with a limited audience might be available to it after authorization. If no access at all is granted without authorization, it SHOULD return code `401 Unauthorized`. 

```http
GET https://example.org/resource
```

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
WWW-Authenticate: Bearer realm="posts" scope="read"
Link: <https://example.org/token>; rel="token_endpoint"
…
```

(NOTE: both the realm and scope attributes in the example above are OPTIONAL)

If the client does not already possess an applicable token, it can use AutoAuth to have the user's authorization endpoint obtain one for it. HTTP defines the concept of "protection spaces" for which authorization credentials are valid: 

> A protection space is defined by the canonical root URI (the scheme and authority components of the effective request URI [...]) of the server being accessed, in combination with the realm value if present. 



## General Notes about Requests

Following OAuth 2.0, all exchanges unless noted otherwise happen through POST requests with form-encoded payloads and JSON response types. Applications SHOULD use the appropriate `Content-Type` and `Accept` headers to indicate this.

## Obtaining an Access Token for the Resource

The guardian of the user's identity in IndieAuth is the authorization endpoint. It is tasked here with obtaining tokens for the resource. The owner of the resource will need a confirmation that request is made at the behest of the user, and the authorization endpoint is able to provide this very similarly to how it confirms the identity in IndieAuth.

### Token Request

The authorization endpoint creates an unique authorization code. With this code, a POST request to the resource's token endpoint is made. This is similar to the authorization flow in in IndieAuth, except that the authorization and token endpoints here belong to *different* sites. This request contains the following parameters:

* `grant_type=authorization_code`
* `code` - The authorization code generated by the authorization endpoint. See https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-4.1.2 for requirements on the authorization code.
* `root_uri`- The root URI of the protection space 
* `realm` - the realm requested if any
* `scope` - the scope requested (note that the auth endpoint could decide here to not request a scope the client asked for)
* `state` - a randomly chosen spoofing-protection parameter which will be included in the callback. If working with client requests as described below, the authorization endpoint MUST NOT reuse the state used by the client.
* `callback_url` - URL owned by the authorization endpoint to send the token to after the authorization code has been verified
* `me` - the users URL
* `client_id` - URL of the authorization endpoint

```http
POST https://example.org/token
Content-Type: x-www-form-urlencoded
Accept: application/json

grant_type=authorization_code
&code=xxxxxxxxx
&root_uri=https://example.org
&realm=posts
&scope=read
&state=4234067
&callback_url=https://user.example/auth?x=callback
&me=https://user.example/
&client_id=https//user.example/auth
```

#### Response

If the token endpoint agrees to proceed with the process,  the token endpoint returns a HTTP `202 Accepted` response. Otherwise, it returns an OAuth 2.0 error.
Note that this request is not yet verified to actually be from the user's authorization endpoint, so aborting here should only happen in cases where no sensitive information is revealed. E.g. it is safe to return an error if the protection space is unknown or never granted access to, but user-specific decisions could reveal sensitive information and thus should not be made here. 



### Authorization Code Verification Request

The token endpoint needs to verify that the authorization code is valid and that it was issued for the matching parameters.
It discovers the authorization endpoint from the user's page (`me`) and compares it's url with the `client_id`. If it is equal, it sends it a verification request containing the `code`, `me`, `root_uri`, `realm` (if one was requested), `scope` and `callback_url` parameters.
```http
POST https://user.example/auth
Content-Type: x-www-form-urlencoded
Accept: application/json

code=xxxxxxxxx
&root_uri=https://example.org
&realm=posts
&scope=read
&callback_url=https://user.example/auth?x=callback
&me=https://user.example/
```
The authorization endpoint will validate that the code corresponds with the given parameters (including the value or absence(!) of `realm`). If it does, a HTTP 200 response is returned, otherwise an OAuth 2.0 error response.


### Access Token Callback 

If the verification was successful, the token endpoint can now assume the request is genuine.

If it is willing to grant the token as requested, it generates a token and sends it to the Callback URL using a POST request. Its parameters are: 

* `access_token` - the token
* `token_type: Bearer`
* `state` - the state as submitted by the authorization endpoint in the token request
* `scope` - the scopes for which the token was granted (space-separated list). *OPTIONAL* if equal to the requested scopes.
* `expires_in` - time in seconds in which the token expires. *RECOMMENDED*

If it is not willing to grant the token, it sends an OAuth 2.0 error message to the Callback URL instead, also adding the `state` parameter. 

### Accessing the Protected Resource

The token can now be used to request the resource. It is included in an `Authorization` header with the `Bearer` HTTP authorization scheme.

## Allowing External Clients to obtain Tokens

The above describes how a token can be obtained, but does not prescribe how applications requiring tokens can communicate with the authorization endpoint to trigger this flow. This section adds these pieces to allow applications that are not tightly integrated with the authorization endpoint to obtain tokens through a standardized and safe mechanism. Since all tokens pass through the authorization endpoint, it can keep a record of them and the user can always use them to request revocation at the resource, without the client application cooperating.

### Granting Token-Request Permission to the Client

The Client application can obtain a token authorizing it to make requests for tokens for external resources through an IndieAuth authorization flow. It requests scopes prefixed with `request_external_token`, i.e. to obtain permission to request tokens with `read` scope, it requires a scope of `request_external_token:read`. 

### Callback-based Flow

#### External Token Request

When the client wants to request a token for a resource, it sends a request to the Authorization Endpoint to obtain one. The client makes a POST request to the authorization endpoint with an authorization header containing its token and the following parameters:

- `response_type=external_token`
- `target_url`- the URL of the resource for which to obtain the token
- `state` - a randomly chosen spoofing-protection parameter which will be included in the callback
- `scope` - A space-separated list of scopes the client is requesting, e.g. "read". The client must be authorized to request each of the scopes, by having a matching `request_external_token:` scope itself.
- `callback_url`- the URL on which the client wants to receive the token

```http
POST https://user.example/auth
Authorization: Bearer CLIENT_TOKEN
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
Accept: application/json

response_type=external_token
&target_url=https://example.org/resource
&state=1234567890
&scope=read
&callback_url=https://client.example/callbacks
```

#### Response

If the authorization endpoint accepts the request by the client, it returns a HTTP `202 Accepted` response. Otherwise, it returns an OAuth 2.0 error.

### Obtaining the Token

The authorization endpoint now goes through the flow as described above and obtains a token. If it receives an error at any step, it POSTs it to the callback_url, with the state parameter added.



### External Token Callback 

If the token was successfully obtained, the callback to the client contains the same information as the Access Token Callback, but with the `state` parameter value submitted by the client in the External Token Request, and additionally the `base_uri` and `realm` the token is for.

The client can now use the token to make queries.

## Privacy Considerations

To allow the user to restrict future access of the client, token endpoints MUST support token revocation. Authorization endpoints MUST keep records of tokens issued, and allow the user to revoke them. Systems that integrate the User's Token and Authorization endpoints SHOULD automatically revoke tokens that have been obtained with the Client's credentials if the Client's token is revoked (either by the user, or through Token Revocation)

Authorization endpoints are encouraged to allow further restrictions of the power of a granted token, e.g. to specific domains.

Fetching a file with authorization for the user clearly links the request to the user. Clients should not make such requests unexpectedly, even when they have been granted permission to do so in general. Example: a feed reader should not automatically complete the AutoAuth flow for all feeds that prompt for authorization, but initially ask the user about this.

Clients should treat all responses received from authenticated requests as private and unique to the individual user.

